docs(plugins): more in-depth pluginOptionsSchema documentation (#27541)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/validating-plugin-options.md

---
title: Validating plugin options
---

To help users [configure plugins](/docs/configuring-usage-with-plugin-options/) correctly, a plugin can optionally define a schema to enforce a type for each option. Gatsby will validate that the options users pass match the schema to help them correctly set up their site.

## How to define an options schema

> To define their options schema, plugins export [`pluginOptionsSchema`](/docs/node-apis/#pluginOptionsSchema) from their `gatsby-node.js` file. This function gets passed an instance of [Joi](https://joi.dev) to define the schema with.

Reviewer: Could this get converted into a numbered list of steps? This feels like the core idea behind this "how to" guide, and right now it's a little sparse. Someone might skip over it without realizing that those are the steps they're meant to be following.

Author: I tried that but it felt very strange, as it's really only one step 😅 At least I made this paragraph a tiny bit meatier...

        message: "Hello world"
        optionB: false, // Optional.
      },
    },
  ],
}
```

`gatsby-plugin-console-log` can ensure users have to pass a boolean to `optionA` and a string to `message`, as well as optionally pass a boolean to `optionB`, with this `pluginOptionsSchema`:

```javascript:title=plugins/gatsby-plugin-console-log/gatsby-node.js
exports.pluginOptionsSchema = ({ Joi }) => {
  return Joi.object({
    optionA: Joi.boolean().required().description(`Enables optionA.`),
    message: Joi.string()
      .required()
      .description(`The message logged to the console.`),
    optionB: Joi.boolean().description(`Enables optionB.`),
  })
}
```

If users pass options that do not match the schema, the validation will show an error when they run `gatsby develop` and prompt them to fix their configuration.

## Unit testing an options schema

To verify that a `pluginOptionsSchema` behaves as expected, unit test it with different configurations using the [`gatsby-plugin-utils` package](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/packages/gatsby-plugin-utils#testpluginoptionsschema).

1. Add the `gatsby-plugin-utils` package to your site:

   ```shell

>    npm install gatsby-plugin-utils

Reviewer 2: This should be a `devDependency` I think? 🤔

```suggestion
   npm install --dev gatsby-plugin-utils
```

   ```

> 2. Use the `testPluginOptionsSchema` function exported from the package in your test file. For example, with [Jest](https://jestjs.io):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use the `testPluginOptionsSchema` function exported from the package in your test file. For example, with [Jest](https://jestjs.io), your tests might look something like this:
```

> 2. Use the `testPluginOptionsSchema` function exported from the package in your test file. For example, with [Jest](https://jestjs.io):

Reviewer: Could we link to something that shows the API for `testPluginOptionsSchema`? Or at least briefly explain what the parameters are?

e.g., "This function takes two parameters:
* the plugin's actual Joi schema
* an example plugin options object to test

It returns an object with an `isValid` key, which will be `true` or `false` based on whether or not the options object fits the actual Joi schema."

(Actually, maybe it makes more sense for that API to live in the gatsby-plugin-utils readme?)

       const options = {
         optionA: undefined, // Should be a boolean
         message: 123, // Should be a string
         optionB: `not a boolean`, // Should be a boolean
       }
       const { isValid, errors } = testPluginOptionsSchema(
         pluginOptionsSchema,
         options
       )

       expect(isValid).toBe(false)
       expect(errors).toEqual([
         `"optionA" is required`,
         `"message" must be a string`,
         `"optionB" must be a boolean`,
       ])
     })

     it(`should validate correct options`, () => {
       const options = {
         optionA: false,
         message: "string",
         optionB: true,
       }
       const { isValid, errors } = testPluginOptionsSchema(
         pluginOptionsSchema,
         options
       )

       expect(isValid).toBe(true)
       expect(errors).toEqual([])
     })
   })
   ```

## Best practices for option schemas

The [Joi API documentation](https://joi.dev/api/) is a great reference to use while working on a `pluginOptionsSchema` as it shows all the available types and methods.

Here are some specific Joi best practices for `pluginOptionsSchema`s:

> - [Add descriptions](#add-descriptions)

Author: I was thinking of the list is a concise way to summarize the best practices for people to refer (back) to, rather than being a set of paragraph headers. However, I'm fine with removing it if you prefer that!

> - [Add descriptions](#add-descriptions)

Reviewer: Makes sense to me, let's leave it!

- [Set default options](#set-default-options)
- [Validate external access](#validate-external-access) where necessary
- [Add custom error messages](#add-custom-error-messages) where useful
- [Deprecate options](#deprecating-options) in a major version release rather than removing them

### Add descriptions

> Make sure that every option and field has a `.description()` explaining its purpose. This is helpful for documentation as users can look at the schema and understand all the options. There might also be tooling in the future that auto-generates plugin option documentation from the schema.

Author: Tooling that we might create, and definitely a nice-to-have for the future without any concrete plans!

> ### Set default options

Reviewer 2: This makes it look like it's preferred to set default values on the schema over using JavaScript default values.

```js
exports.onPreInit = (_, { message = `default message` }) => {
  console.log(`logging: "${message}" to the console`)
}
```

Any reason for this preference? 🤔

Author: Yes. If you set default values using JavaScript, they will only apply to one lifecycle:

```JS
exports.onPreInit = (_, { message = "default" }) => {
  ...
}

exports.sourceNodes = (_, { message }) => {
  // Here message won't be defaulted.
}
```

You can use the `.default()` method to set a default value for an option. For example with `gatsby-plugin-console-log`, you can have the `message` option default to `"default message"` in case a user does not pass their own `message`:

```javascript:title=plugins/gatsby-plugin-console-log/gatsby-node.js
exports.pluginOptionsSchema = ({ Joi }) => {
  return Joi.object({
    optionA: Joi.boolean().required().description(`Enables optionA.`),
    message: Joi.string()
      .default(`default message`) // highlight-line
      .description(`The message logged to the console.`),
    optionB: Joi.boolean().description(`Enables optionB.`),
  })
}
```

Accessing `pluginOptions.message` would then log `"default message"` in all plugin APIs if the user does not supply their own value:

```javascript:title=plugins/gatsby-plugin-console-log/gatsby-node.js

> exports.onPreInit = (_, pluginOptions) => {

Reviewer: Sidebar question: Are plugin methods only available from onPreInit, or is it in any of those APIs?

> `exports.onPreInit = (_, pluginOptions)`

Also what is the `_` parameter syntax? I haven't seen that before and couldn't figure out how to google it.

Author: The pluginOptions are available in all of the APIs!

> Also what is the _ parameter syntax? I haven't seen that before and couldn't figure out how to google it.

This is a convention I thought was common to denote unused arguments. (`(_, pluginOptions)` === the first argument to the function isn't used, `(input, pluginOptions)` === it is used) However, that doesn't make any sense in documentation, I should just put the actual name there. Good call! 👍

  console.log(
    `logging: "${pluginOptions.message}" to the console` // highlight-line
  )
}
```

### Validating external access

Some plugins (particularly source plugins) query external APIs. With the `.external()` method, you can asynchronously validate that the user has access to the API, providing a better experience if they pass invalid secrets.

For example, this is how the [Contentful source plugin](/plugins/gatsby-source-contentful/) ensures the user has access to the space they are trying to query:

```javascript:title=gatsby-source-contentful/gatsby-node.js
exports.pluginOptionsSchema = ({ Joi }) => {
  return Joi.object({
    accessToken: Joi.string().required(),
    spaceId: Joi.string().required(),
    // ...more options here...
  }).external(async pluginOptions => {
    try {
      await contentful
        .createClient({
          space: pluginOptions.spaceId,
          accessToken: pluginOptions.accessToken,
        })
        .getSpace()

>     } catch (err) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    } catch {
```

      throw new Error(
        `Cannot access Contentful space "${pluginOptions.spaceId}" with the provided access token. Double check they are correct and try again!`
      )
    }
  })
}
```

### Add custom error messages

Sometimes you might want to provide more detailed error messages when validation fails for a specific field. Joi provides a [`.messages()` method](https://joi.dev/api/?v=17.2.1#anymessagesmessages) which lets you override error messages for specific [error types](https://joi.dev/api/?v=17.2.1#list-of-errors) (e.g. `"any.required"` when a `.required()` call fails).

> For example, this is how we would provide a custom error message if users do not specify `optionA` for `gatsby-plugin-console-log`:

Reviewer: Per the style guide, [use "you" instead of "we"](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/contributing/gatsby-style-guide/#use-you-as-the-pronoun).

```suggestion
For example, in the `gatsby-plugin-console-log` plugin above, this is how you would provide a custom error message if users do not specify `optionA`:
```

```javascript:title=plugins/gatsby-plugin-console-log/gatsby-node.js
exports.pluginOptionsSchema = ({ Joi }) => {
  return Joi.object({
    optionA: Joi.boolean()
      .required()
      .description(`Enables optionA.`)
      // highlight-start
      .messages({
        // Override the error message if the .required() call fails
        "any.required": `"optionA" needs to be specified to true or false. Get the correct value from your dashboard settings.`,
      }),
    // highlight-end
    message: Joi.string()
      .default(`default message`)
      .description(`The message logged to the console.`),
    optionB: Joi.boolean().description(`Enables optionB.`),
  })
}
```

### Deprecating options

> Rather than removing options from the schema, deprecate them using the [`.forbidden()` method](https://joi.dev/api/?v=17.2.1#anyforbidden) in a major version release. Then, [add a custom error message](#add-custom-error-messages) explaining how users should upgrade the functionality using `.messages()`.

Reviewer: Why? What do they lose by just removing options?

---
title: Validating plugin options
---

To help users [configure plugins](/docs/configuring-usage-with-plugin-options/) correctly, a plugin can optionally define a schema to enforce a type for each option. When users use a plugin, Gatsby will validate that the provided options match the schema.

## How to define an options schema

> To define their options schema, plugins export a [`pluginOptionsSchema`](/docs/node-apis/#pluginOptionsSchema) from their `gatsby-node.js`. This function gets passed an instance of [Joi](https://joi.dev) to define the schema with.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To define their options schema, plugins export [`pluginOptionsSchema`](/docs/node-apis/#pluginOptionsSchema) from their `gatsby-node.js` file. This function gets passed an instance of [Joi](https://joi.dev) to define the schema with.
```

> For example, consider the following plugin called `gatsby-plugin-console-log`:

Author: This is the same example used throughout the "Configuring usage with plugin options" doc, which is right before this one, however I figured it wouldn't hurt to re-introduce it since folks might open this page directly.

Reviewer: Agreed! Good thinking 👏

        optionA: true,
        message: "Hello world"
        optionB: false, // Optional.
      },
    },
  ],
}
```

`gatsby-plugin-console-log` can ensure users have to pass a boolean to `optionA` and a string to `message`, as well as optionally pass a boolean to `optionB`, with this `pluginOptionsSchema`:

```javascript:title=plugins/gatsby-plugin-console-log/gatsby-node.js
exports.pluginOptionsSchema = ({ Joi }) => {
  return Joi.object({
    optionA: Joi.boolean().required().description(`Enables optionA.`),
    message: Joi.string()
      .required()
      .description(`The message logged to the console.`),
    optionB: Joi.boolean().description(`Enables optionB.`),
  })
}
```

If users pass options that do not match the schema, the validation will show an error when they run `gatsby develop` and prompt them to fix their configuration.

## Unit testing an options schema

To verify that a `pluginOptionsSchema` behaves as expected, unit test it with different configurations using the [`gatsby-plugin-utils` package](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/packages/gatsby-plugin-utils#testpluginoptionsschema).

1. Add the `gatsby-plugin-utils` package to your site:

>    ```shell
>    yarn add gatsby-plugin-utils
>    ```
> 
>    or
> 
>    ```shell
>    npm install gatsby-plugin-utils
>    ```

Reviewer 4: ````suggestion
   ```shell
   npm install gatsby-plugin-utils
   ```
````

We're only ever using `npm` in our docs :)

> 2. Use the `testPluginOptionsSchema` function exported from it in your test file. For example, with [Jest](https://jestjs.io):

Reviewer 3: What is "it" here?

>    ```javascript:title=plugins/gatsby-plugin-console/__tests__/gatsby-node.test.js

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   ```javascript:title=plugins/gatsby-plugin-console/__tests__/gatsby-node.js
```

Our own guide leaves out the `.test` part when using `__tests__` folder, so I guess keep it consistent?
https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/unit-testing/

       expect(isValid).toBe(false)
       expect(errors).toEqual([
         `"optionA" is required`,
         `"message" must be a string`,
         `"optionB" must be a boolean`,
       ])
     })

     it(`should validate correct options`, () => {
       const options = {
         optionA: false,
         message: "string",
         optionB: true,
       }
       const { isValid, errors } = testPluginOptionsSchema(
         pluginOptionsSchema,
         options
       )

       expect(isValid).toBe(true)
       expect(errors).toEqual([])
     })
   })
   ```

## Best practices for option schemas

The [Joi API documentation](https://joi.dev/api/) is a great reference to use while working on a `pluginOptionsSchema` as it shows all the available types and methods.

Here are some specific Joi best practices for `pluginOptionsSchema`s:

- [Add descriptions](#add-descriptions)
- [Set default options](#set-default-options)
- [Validate external access](#validate-external-access) where necessary
- [Add custom error messages](#add-custom-error-messages) where useful
- [Deprecate options](#deprecating-options) in a major version release rather than removing them

### Add descriptions

> Make sure that every option and field has a `.description()` explaining its purpose. While this is not immediately visible, there might be tooling in the future that auto-generates plugin option documentation from the schema.

Reviewer 4: Maybe add that this also helps with self-documenting what the option is for the developers themselves?

### Set default options

> You can use the `.default()` method to default a value for an option. For example with `gatsby-plugin-console-log`, this is how it can default the `message` option to `"default message"` in case users do not pass their own `message`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the `.default()` method to set a default value for an option. For example with `gatsby-plugin-console-log`, you can have the `message` option default to  `"default message"` in case a user does not pass their own `message`:
```

```javascript:title=plugins/gatsby-plugin-console-log/gatsby-node.js
exports.pluginOptionsSchema = ({ Joi }) => {
  return Joi.object({
    optionA: Joi.boolean().required().description(`Enables optionA.`),
    message: Joi.string()
      .default(`default message`) // highlight-line
      .description(`The message logged to the console.`),
    optionB: Joi.boolean().description(`Enables optionB.`),
  })
}
```

Accessing `pluginOptions.message` would then log `"default message"` in all plugin APIs if the user does not supply their own value:

```javascript:title=plugins/gatsby-plugin-console-log/gatsby-node.js
exports.onPreInit = (_, pluginOptions) => {
  console.log(
    `logging: "${pluginOptions.message}" to the console` // highlight-line
  )
}
```

### Validating external access

> Some plugins (particularly source plugins) query external APIs. With the `.external()` method, they can asynchronously validate that users have access to the API to provide a better experience if they pass invalid secrets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some plugins (particularly source plugins) query external APIs. With the `.external()` method, you can asynchronously validate that the user has access to the API, providing a better experience if they pass invalid secrets.
```

For example, this is how the [Contentful source plugin](/plugins/gatsby-source-contentful/) ensures the user has access to the space they are trying to query:

```javascript:title=gatsby-source-contentful/gatsby-node.js
exports.pluginOptionsSchema = ({ Joi }) => {
  return Joi.object({
    accessToken: Joi.string().required(),
    spaceId: Joi.string().required(),
    // ...more options here...
  }).external(async pluginOptions => {
    try {
      await contentful

>         .createClient({

Author: Keen eyes will spot that this is not the actual code used in the Contentful plugin. That is on purpose, as the actual code uses a vanilla `fetch` call with headers etc. and is more verbose, i.e. makes for a bad example as it hides the true intent of the function.

I figured the contentful SDK API would make the example clearer!

Reviewer: It might be helpful to put that caveat in here, so that people don't use this as a source of truth re: how Contentful works. It might be as simple as just changing the paragraph introducing the example to something like, "For example, this is how the Contentful source plugin schema might look if they wanted to validate using [whatever thing they would use instead of `fetch`]"

          space: pluginOptions.spaceId,
          accessToken: pluginOptions.accessToken,
        })
        .getSpace()
    } catch (err) {
      throw new Error(
        `Cannot access Contentful space "${pluginOptions.spaceId}" with the provided access token. Double check they are correct and try again!`
      )
    }
  })
}
```

### Add custom error messages

> Sometimes you might want to provide more detailed error messages when validation fails for a specific field. Joi provides a [`.messages()` method](https://github.com/sideway/joi/issues/2109) which lets you override error messages for specific [error types](https://joi.dev/api/?v=17.2.1#list-of-errors).

Reviewer 4: Why not link to https://joi.dev/api/?v=17.2.1#anymessagesmessages in first link?

Author: Because the documentation for that function is practically useless. 😬  It shows this:

<img width="530" alt="Screenshot 2020-10-20 at 08 33 24" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7525670/96548903-fb9e5800-12ae-11eb-8357-9ab9e7c893a5.png">

which links to

<img width="563" alt="Screenshot 2020-10-20 at 08 33 37" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7525670/96548917-00fba280-12af-11eb-9cd9-e8e61762a452.png">

neither of which tell the user anything about using `.messages()`. I'd rather link something that has a useful explanation that helps plugin authors dive deeper!

Reviewer 4: But if the API gets changed the link to that issue is obsolete and we won't know it until someone runs into problems. You can add a note that it takes in the same object like `messages` on the `validate` function: https://joi.dev/api/?v=17.2.1#anyvalidatevalue-options
